Hi, everyone.
In this lecture, we're going to capture the Arrow Keys.
All right, so what it is actually that we are going to do in this lecture, we are going to capture
when the arrow, the Parakey has been pressed has is key down and then when it is key up and the same
thing for all the rest of the directions.
So what are we going to do?
First is I'm going to come right here and I'm going to say Arrow Directions.
Directions event listeners, event listeners.
Now, we have talked about giving listeners a lot, so I'm just going to go ahead and breeze through
this.
Right, and not explaining it that much because we have talked about it a ton.
So, first of all, let's create some variables for whenever they are a down Iraqi, up Iraqi, left
Iraqi and right Iraqis, they have been pressed.
So first off, I'm going to create it for the up direction.
I'm just going to say up there and I'm going to set it to false because initially nothing is pressed.
You can see it.
The ball moves in no, no direction.
So initially it should be false.
And let's copy this three more times and I'm going to say down it's going to be false.
And let's put it to the left, false and right, false.
Now, let's create the case.
Now, the event is going to be fired on the document itself.
We are not going to attach it to any specific element, but the document itself and we're going to add
event listener and we are going to say key down.
So the key is down.
And when the key is down, the event is going to start firing and it is going to fire as as for as long
as the key is down.
Right.
So for that, I'm just going to create a function key down.
And when the event stops and when does the event start firing, the event stops firing whenever the
key is up.
That's why we're going to create a function for that as well.
So.
All right, so first off, let's go ahead and let's drop this.
I'm just going to come down here and I'm going to say
Arrow.
Keys functions.
All right, so first off, let's create the down down the key down function, so the key down, I'm
going to grab the event because that is going to be critical for us.
Now, first off, let's go ahead and let's log some things to the console.
And I'm going to say I'm just going to say I'm just going to suffice to say keep key are just all right.
I'm not going to specify key up.
I'm just going to come in this one out.
Let's so inside the Web page, inside the document, when the user clicks, for example, if I press
the up arrow key, you can see that the event has been fired.
Now, what's associated with the event?
We have a key that says arrow up.
And what is the key code for?
For the up arrow.
The key code is 38.
So if I come down here.
If I commented Arrow.
And up, it's going to be 38, I already know all of them, but I want to show it to guys anyway.
So for this one, it's going to be 40 and there we go.
So the key code is 40.
And if I put it down arrow.
Down for this one, it's going to be 40 for the left, it's going to be 37.
So if I click on it left, you can see that it says Arrow left and it's thirty seven.
So let's see.
Thirty seven.
This is how we track which arrow key has been pressed.
So and for the right, it's going to be 39.
I'm not going to do that.
So this is going to be thirty nine.
Now how can we actually use this now.
We are going to say we are going to create four if statements and each of the statements is going to
be for a specific key that has been pressed.
So now if we say that E that if the E that key code.
Is equal to 40.
You know what, I'm going to start with the top, I'm going to say 38.
So whenever the key code is thirty eight, what do we want to do?
We want to say we want to grab the up direction and we want to set it to true because 38 says it's the
up arrow has been pressed.
And when it has been pressed the abduction, it means that we are moving in the other direction.
So this is the first one I could copy three more times and I could put them right here.
So for the second one, I'm going to say down.
Now, what is the key code for the down it is 40, so let's just put it 40.
So if the key code that is the key that has been pressed has a key code of 40, then the down direction
is going to be it means we are moving in the down direction.
And for the left, you are going to have 37 for the right who are going to have 39.
So let's change this to the left and let's change this to write similarly.
All right.
So now we have done we have selected our arrow of arrow down, all of the key.
So what I'm going to do is I'm just going to remove that because I don't want to create extra lines
of code and I'm going to grab this function and I'm going to copy it down below.
And we are basically doing the same thing right now.
The other function is going to be key up.
So I'm going to come up and I'm going to come in this one.
And and now whenever the key, this key function fires on an event and that event has a key code of
thirty eight, we want to say that the key is up now and when the key is up, the ball is no longer
moving.
So it is going to be false.
And when the down direction kicks up, the ball is no longer moving and the same way for any other ones.
So if the key is up, it means the ball is not moving in that direction.
Right.
So we set all of them to false, let's say it, and a right.
So how can we actually use this now, we have successfully targeted this, so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to come right below our game loop and I'm going to create a function that says moving the
bowls, the balls, moving the ball.
Right.
And let's call this function arrow input's.
I'm just going to call it error inputs.
I think it makes the most sense.
Now, if now here still we are going to need four other FS because if the ball if if the down Iraqi
has been pressed or if the down direction is true, we want to move this ball in its Y direction.
And what is the amount that we want to move it by?
The amount that we want to move it by is going to be our 50.
So we want to move it by 50 pixels whenever that bottom or down arrow has been pressed.
So how can we translate that into code?
So if I come here now, let's say if the up direction is true, now we know if you just pass in one
single expression here, it is going to either return true or false.
So if you just pass in, for example, this variable, if this variable has a boolean value, then this
if statement is either going to return true or false, we can see that in in action.
We can see that the ball moves.
The ball is moving upwards.
Right.
So this is going to fire whenever the other direction is true.
Now, you can see that by default, all of the directions are false.
They are going to get true.
They are going to be evaluated as true whenever we get whenever the abduction is, for example, whenever
any of them.
So in order for this to actually work, we need to call it inside here as well.
So I'm just going to say arrow inputs.
I'm just going to call it there.
Let's save it.
Let's come here.
So now if I click the button, you can see that the ball is moving and I'm going to zoom in.
It has moved nineteen by nineteen frames.
So there we go.
You can see that the ball is moving.
So we have successfully done that.
And now instead of logging something to the console, what it is actually that we want to move, we
want whenever the obstruction key has been pressed, it means that the ball is moving in the right direction.
Right.
And what do we want to do in the other direction?
Because in the world of success, if you're moving upwards, it means you are moving to the negative
direction.
It's it has it is the same concept with margins and patterns.
So if you provide a margin of negative 10 pixel, the item, that element is going to move up.
If you provide a margin of positive 10 pixels, that element is going to move down.
So positive is going to be down and negative is going to be up.
And for the X axis, negative is going to be left and positive is going to be right.
So if you provide margin, a margin of left of negative 10 pixels, the element is going to go to the
left.
If you say marginal left of positive 10 pixels, the element is going to go to the right.
So this is how the signs work in the world of success.
And the same thing applies in JavaScript.
So whenever the ball is moving in the other direction, we want to grab the Y position of that ball.
And from the Y position of that ball, we want to subtract the speed.
It means that the ball is moving up.
So let's save it.
Let's come here.
So if I click on it, you can see that the ball is moving up.
Now, there is another problem here.
All right.
You can see that this is actually the ideology behind creating games and behind creating motion picture
animation.
Whatever you can see on your screen, this is the idea behind that.
Any time the screen is being refreshed, any time the screen is being refreshed, we are redrawing the
screen.
And if we do not clear the screen after we have drawn the next frame, this is what we are going to
get.
We are going to get a continuous line that is going to go.
So when when the ball is right here, we need to remove all the previous false.
All right.
And this redrawing of the screen each time the screen is being refreshed can be better, like visualize
if I change the film's style to stroke's style, if we just leave the insert in inner of the circle
empty like no color and just just draw the circle friends and we are going to say stroke style instead
of the film, we are going to say.
We have done this so and if I click on it, you can see that we get this circle now if I try to move
up, you can see we are reading now this is very visible right now.
You can see that we are redrawing the circle time and time and time and time and went.
And now the circle is right here.
So we have to remove all the previous iterations of that circle.
So in order to to clear our canvas, we have already talked about a specific method that we can use.
And that is the clear RACT.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to grab our can canvas context and I'm going to say clear RACT
and this is going to grab the position for X and Y and then the canvas elements with and also the canvas
elements.
Height.
Perfect.
So now if I zoom out and if I try to move up, you can see that there are still those circles being
drawn there.
But the difference is that now after the circle moves to the next frame, the previous frame is clear.
That's it.
So that's basically what we do there.
So now click.
You can see that.
You can see the previous frames.
And this gives us the illusion that this circle is moving.
It's actually being redrawn 60 times per one second.
Very simple.
And you can see only the 16th time that the circle has been redrawn.
You are not going to see the other 59 times that the circle has been drawn.
You're not going to see it.
And you can see that when because we don't have collision detection, the circle is moving off the canvas.
That's why we do collision detection.
We don't want it to move off.
For example, when we get to creating the pong game, we don't want it to move off the canvas when the
player paddle hits it or just like move through the player paddle.
We don't want it to do that.
We want it to detect that edge and then bounce back.
That's why we want to we are going to study this collision detection in depth, because this is one
of the core pillars of understanding game development in JavaScript and in general.
So that's it for this lecture.
See you guys in the next one.
Now, before going, I need to set this back.
So I'm just going to bring back our film style and I'm going to just go ahead and remove these strokes
style so we get our circle and our circle has gives us the illusion that it is actually moving.
See you guys in the next lecture.